Blog: January 2026 blog post (#48)
AerynOS/dotcom: src/content/docs/blog/2026/31/January 2026 project update/index.mdx

---
title: "January 2026 project update"
date: 2026-01-30T12:00:00Z
authors: [nomadiccore, ermo]
tags: [news]
---

import Kofi from "@/components/ui/Kofi.astro";
import { Aside } from "@astrojs/starlight/components";

# AerynOS: January 2026 project update

![Fresh Start](Fresh-start.jpg)

Kicking off 2026, activity across the AerynOS project has been moving at pace. As covered in our 2025 retrospective, last year the team laid the groundwork for the project's future growth and development. Starting off 2026, the team is building upon this foundation to keep delivering progress across the project.

From a core tooling perspective, we are preparing for the next phase of our Versioned Repository feature set. During January, we have been refining our existing codebase to make future improvements easier to implement. Once delivered, moss will be able to update itself seamlessly through what would otherwise have been breaking changes to its codebase. This functionality will be very important for our long term goals as a rolling release distro where you never have to reinstall to receive the latest updates.

> Progress has been made around our branding with efforts towards a new website design and a healthy discussion and proposals for a new AerynOS logo. You may recently have seen that AerynOS is taking a stronger stance against the use of LLMs and generative AI. In full transparency, our current logo was AI generated and we actively want to move to a human created logo for the reasons mentioned in our [LLM policy](https://github.com/aerynOS/.github?tab=contributing-ov-file#llm-contributions).

Reviewer: I wouldn't mention the old logo in this context tbh., because I don't think the reasons mentioned in the policy make sense to reference here. The energy has already been spent on the old logo, replacing it doesn't change anything in that regard.

Author: I've removed the reference to the Logo but kept the wording around the LLM policy as it's probably important to note in the blog in general.

> Additional progress has been made project-wide on our documentation and we have also made improvements to our CDN implementation for improved package delivery.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additional progress has been made project-wide on our documentation and we have also made improvements to our CDN setup for improved package delivery.
```

Our efforts are seemingly well received, we are seeing an influx of new members joining our Zulip server and getting involved with AerynOS, whether through general discussion or through packaging efforts. We have also seen a jump in our followers across our various social media accounts and generally a more positive reception of what AerynOS is trying to achieve in the Linux space.

## What’s new in the distro

Package / stack updates for this iteration include:

- COSMIC 1.0.3
- GNOME 49.3
- KDE Frameworks 6.22.0
- KDE Gear 25.12.1
- KDE Plasma 6.5.5

> - brush 0.3.0-dev (bash compatible shell built w/ Rust)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- brush 0.3.0-dev (bash compatible shell written in Rust)
```

maybe?

- dankmaterialshell 1.2.3 (build your own wayland desktop experience in material design style)
- firefox 147.0.2
- fish 4.3.3 (user friendly shell built w/ Rust)
- foot terminal 1.25.0 (fast, wayland-native terminal emulator)

> - ghostty terminal 1.3.0-dev (virtual terminal built w/ zig)

Reviewer: same for these

- glibc 2.43+git.144ba302
- lact 0.8.3 (gui for tweaking gpu voltages, fan curves and frequencies)
- linux 6.18.7
- mangowc 0.10.10 (wayland compositor with eye candy effects)
- mesa 25.3.4
- nodejs 24.13.0
- pipewire 1.4.10
- prism-launcher 10.0.2 (minecraft launcher)
- qemu 10.2.0
- quickshell 0.2.1 (building blocks for wayland compositor-based desktop experiences)
- ruby 4.0.1
- thunderbird 147.0.1
- vscode 1.108.2
- vscodium 1.108.10359
- wine 11

> - zed 0.218.7 (text editor built w/ Rust)

Reviewer: and this

... along with sundry additions and updates.

## Desktop Updates

### Cosmic

![Cosmic Install](Cosmic_Screenshot.jpg)

> Given [System76's](https://system76.com/cosmic) move to a more regular release cycle for Cosmic DE, we are able to land updates to our repository more frequently. This month, System76 landed Cosmic 1.0.3 with some key updates including support for rounded corners and window shadows across all applications and additional appearance settings being made available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given System76's move to a more regular release cycle for [Cosmic DE](https://system76.com/cosmic), we are able to land updates to our repository more frequently. This month, System76 landed Cosmic 1.0.3 with some key updates including support for rounded corners and window shadows across all applications and additional appearance settings being made available.
```

<Aside title="Cosmic">

    AerynOS is following the System76's "Epoch" git branch for Cosmic DE. This is where System76 stages new updates to the Cosmic ecosystem before publishing new point releases. As such, AerynOS' Cosmic offering is somewhere between 1.0.3 and 1.0.4. 
    
    Given that Cosmic 1.0.4 has been released, it will be included in our repository shortly. It may already be there by the time you read this blog post.

</Aside>

### Gnome

![Gnome Install](Gnome_Screenshot.jpg)

> This month sees the inclusion of [Gnome 49.3](https://discourse.gnome.org/t/gnome-49-3-released/33609) which is a stable bug fix release with updates across the Gnome stack. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This month sees the inclusion of [Gnome 49.3](https://discourse.gnome.org/t/gnome-49-3-released/33609) which is a stable bug-fix release with updates across the Gnome stack. 
```

As a result, if you're the sort who prefers to assemble your own Desktop Experience, we now have foot, quickshell and dankmaterialshell as a few examples of packages you can use as a base to make your Desktop Experience "just so".

As a reminder, we do not include MangoWC, Niri or Sway as options to install directly from our `lichen` installer. Users interested in building their own Desktop Experiences on AerynOS can use our `terminal-only` option and then install their preferred Wayland Compositor and associated packages of choice from the command line.

<iframe title="Show &amp; Tell: MangoWC on AerynOS" width="1280" height="720" src="https://exquisite.tube/videos/embed/1R1WCHZyeGiQPKouVRMBPn" style="border: 0px;" allow="fullscreen" sandbox="allow-same-origin allow-scripts allow-popups allow-forms"></iframe>

<Aside title="Why not use our system-model?">

>     Our new system-model approach can be used as a way of significantly simplifying the process of setting up a new AerynOS install by declaratively stating which packages you want installed on your system from a given repository (currently either Unstable or Volatile) and even being able to lock your environment to any given fixed-in-time stream update tag.

Reviewer: Same concern about code blocks here.

    
    For more information about our system-model approach, please refer to the our previous [2025 in retrospect blog post](https://aerynos.com/blog/2026/01/2025-in-retrospect/#system-model)

</Aside>

## Infrastructure and Tooling Updates

### debuginfod

> This month, courtesy [Joey Riches](https://github.com/joebonrichie), we added a `debuginfod` service hosted at https://debuginfod.aerynos.dev! For those unaware, [debuginfod](https://sourceware.org/elfutils/Debuginfod.html) is a service that finds and collects debug information in packages and hosts them to be downloadable over a simple Web API. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This month, courtesy of [Joey Riches](https://github.com/joebonrichie), we brought up a `debuginfod` instance at https://debuginfod.aerynos.dev! For those unaware, [debuginfod](https://sourceware.org/elfutils/Debuginfod.html) is a service that finds and collects debug information in packages and hosts them to be downloadable over a simple Web API. 
```

In practice, this means that downstream consumers such as `gdb` can automatically download the correct debuginfo files matching an executable's build-id. No more manually searching for and installing the correct `-dbginfo` packages to successfully populate a backtrace with symbols.

To use AerynOS's debuginfod service ensure you have `https://debuginfod.aerynos.dev` in the `$DEBUGINFOD_URLS` environment variable. Assuming you have `libdebuginfod` installed, this should be set up to work out of the the box.

> `-dbginfo` packages are still available in the repository in case you do not wish to use debuginfod, or your tool of choice doesn't yet support it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`-dbginfo` packages are still available in the repository in case you don't want to use debuginfod, or your tool of choice doesn't yet support it.
```

This is useful when troubleshooting, as it allows us to diagnose whether there is an issue with the user's internet connection, or with the package itself on our server.

This error handling workstream will continue in the background to further improve the quality of human readable error output in our tooling.

## Wider Project Updates

### Website redesign

It has been clear to us for a while that the AerynOS website needs an update and this is something we have highlighted in previous blog posts. Following a review, the team has settled on using the Hextra theme on the Hugo static site generator.

Without going into a lot of detail, the Hextra theme is well maintained and has a lot of functionality built-in, meaning it is well suited to our use case.

NomadicCore has created a new branch on the [dotcom](https://github.com/AerynOS/dotcom/tree/NewSite) repository to work on this in the background. Given the move between Static Site Generators and more generally the different content we want to present on the site, there is still a fair way to go.

> If you are interested or experienced in website design and want to help out, join our [Zulip](https://aerynos.zulipchat.com) server and get to know the team.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are interested and want to help out, join our [Zulip](https://aerynos.zulipchat.com) server and get to know the team.
```

I don't think people will get in touch if they're not interested 😂
So we should either replace "or" by "and", or remove this bit (as suggested above).

The end result should serve to increase the consistency and speed of downloads within moss when using AerynOS from the unstable stream.

### Documentation

CookieSource and NomadicCore have continued working on the [documentation](https://aerynos.zulipchat.com/) site over the last month.

The team have also updated documentation on the GitHub org including topics such as contributing, licensing, readmes and more. Some of these had fallen behind our latest position or had never been adequately fleshed out.

This effort is all intended to help interested parties get a better understanding of AerynOS and help them be able to contribute more quickly.

Notable changes include:

- A new "Creating a new package recipe" [page](https://aerynos.dev/packaging/workflow/creating-a-new-recipe/)
- Addition of a "How to submit a PR" [page](https://aerynos.dev/packaging/workflow/submitting-a-pr/)
- The ability to view our documentation site as a single [PDF](https://aerynos.dev/aerynos.pdf)
- Updates to our contributing.md file across our GitHub organisation
- The introduction of a policy around **prohibiting the use of LLMs when engaging with AerynOS**

### GitHub vs Codeberg

> One area of potential interest is around our use of GitHub. Over time, the team has become increasingly dissatisfied with GitHub for various reasons, including the increased push towards AI and the specter of not having control / sovereignty over our code and/or being locked out with no warning.

Reviewer: "specter"? I would say my English is pretty good but I don't know what this means in this context / whether it's a typo.

Author: Should be spectre defined as "something widely feared as a possible unpleasant or dangerous occurrence" but I've changed to concern.

As and when we do make the transition to Codeberg, we would also like to sponsor them at the same time. An important tenet of AerynOS is to support and promote open source projects where we can. By way of example, its why we use Zulip (and previously Matrix) over something like Discord. 

Sponsorship, where we are able, is another way we feel we can support the open source community and as our own sponsorship / income grows, we will be in a better position to contribute to the upstream projects on which we rely.

## ISO refresh

We are releasing our newest Alpha ISO, AerynOS 2026.01, which includes the updates we've worked on since the start of December, and which features the 6.18.7 kernel.

As usual, this is a Live GNOME ISO that merely serves as a delivery vehicle for our Alpha/PoC `lichen` installer. Hence, installing AerynOS requires a network connection over which the latest pkgsets can be downloaded and subsequently installed onto a hard drive.

The link for our 2026.01 ISO can be found on our [download](/download/) page.

## Next Steps

We have spent the month of January taking stock of our future development direction, including short and medium term goals.

> This has resulted in several nice refactors to how moss works internally, which will in turn make it significantly easier for us to implement some of the medium term features we have planned. It has also already helped us prepare a few planned features, such as better error messages and the in-progress `moss fetch` feature, which can be used to download .stones in advance for testing purposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This has resulted in several nice refactors to how moss works internally, which will in turn make it significantly easier for us to implement some of the medium term features we have planned. It has also already helped us prepare a few planned features, such as better error messages and the in-progress `moss fetch` feature, which can be used to download packages in advance for testing purposes.
```

maybe?
